feat(blog): scipy24 recap blogpost with pictures (#448)
pyOpenSci/pyopensci.github.io: _posts/2024-07-22-pyopensci-at-scipy-2024.md

---
layout: single

> title: "pyOpenSci a Recap of @ SciPy 2024 Meeting - Tacoma, Washington"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: "pyOpenSci a Recap of @ SciPy 2024 Meeting - Tacoma, Washington"
```

> title: "pyOpenSci a Recap of @ SciPy 2024 Meeting - Tacoma, Washington"

Author: awesome. @kierisi just a note that here you have a suggested change but the actual change is in the comment text so i can't actually "accept" the change and give you credit for it . Would you like to make the change inline so i can commit it (and the commit then is in your name! so your work gets credit). i can also modify locally - up to you!

> title: "pyOpenSci a Recap of @ SciPy 2024 Meeting - Tacoma, Washington"

Reviewer: nope! I didn't want to assume what the title should be, so feel free to use whatever works best for you :)

> title: "pyOpenSci a Recap of @ SciPy 2024 Meeting - Tacoma, Washington"

Author: Ok got it. I suggest that you play with the how comments work and what they look like on GitHub.

This is what i see which suggests you were trying to edit the text inline. When i look at the comment, I think your intention might have been to suggest a change to the header which is why i asked you for followup. 

I think your actual intention was just to leave text feedback. it would be more clear to me then if you just left a comment rather than a text suggestion that has no actual changes to the text

<img width="556" alt="Screenshot 2024-08-02 at 10 10 08 AM" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/7e0e4ba9-3176-4a34-bd1c-1dce545198f4">

does that make sense? please let me know if it doesnt. there are several comments here that look like you started to edit the text and then didn't which will prompt me to ask for more information to ensure i'm capturing the feedbac correctly.

> title: "pyOpenSci a Recap of @ SciPy 2024 Meeting - Tacoma, Washington"

Reviewer: yep, got it! I'll be more decisive next time in whether or not I provide an inline edit, and make sure to use the corresponding feature.

> excerpt: "This year I gave a talk and lead a packaging workshop at the SciPy 2024 conference in Tacoma Washington. Learn more about the SciPy meeting and how exciting it was for pyOpenSci to be there this year!"

Reviewer: are you thinking of the actual blog post page? this is what I see when I go to the main blog page:

<img width="1160" alt="Screenshot 2024-08-02 at 5 38 49 AM" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/17c58d88-717b-4111-96da-05aba387bc20">

> excerpt: "This year I gave a talk and lead a packaging workshop at the SciPy 2024 conference in Tacoma Washington. Learn more about the SciPy meeting and how exciting it was for pyOpenSci to be there this year!"

Reviewer: so there's no author information

(also, I just noted that the alignment is off between the title and the body of the preview text. should I file an issue for that?)

> excerpt: "This year I gave a talk and lead a packaging workshop at the SciPy 2024 conference in Tacoma Washington. Learn more about the SciPy meeting and how exciting it was for pyOpenSci to be there this year!"

Author: that alignment is intentional. I just redid that page this week with the events pr. 
 
the issue that i think you should file is related to wanting the author to be listed on the blog listing page. This topic is  out of scope for this pr because this pr is only a new blog post.  

Being super specific about where information is missing (in context of a specific PR) is important to avoid scope creep in a single pr and conversations then straying from the pr that we are trying to merge.

Feel free to open an issue (and a pr?) related to the blog landing page and please include screenshots and make it specific if you want someone else to fix it so we can tag it with help wanted!

categories:
  - blog-post
  - community
classes: wide
toc: true
comments: true
---

<div class="notice" markdown = "1">
## TL;DR

* pyOpenSci lead 3 incredibly successful events at SciPy this year: A tutorial,
a talk and a 1.5 day sprint
* During our SciPy 2024 meeting sprint we had over 35 GitHub issues and pull requests submitted by XX new contributors.
* Our tutorial had 40 registrations and ~30 people showed up. Almost all learners had never created a Python package before and almost all learners were successful creating their first Python package.
* I thoroughly enjoyed connect with new and old colleagues and friends.

</div>

## My SciPy 2024 experience

This year was my fourth time attending the annual SciPy meeting—a meeting
organized by [NumFocus](https://www.numfocus.org) that celebrates the scientific
Python ecosystem. My first experience was in 2019, where we held the very first
pyOpenSci BoF (Birds of a Feather) session.

A Birds of a Feather session, also known as a BoF, is a community-organized
event where people lead a discussion around a specific topic. Our BoF was about
our peer review process, which we had just launched that year.
{: .notice }

> In previous years, pyOpenSci was less known in the community. This year, however,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One of the biggest differences this year has been how much pyOpenSci has grown, which means we saw many familiar faces, including: 
```

> was different. There were many familiar faces, including:

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

* Maintainers of packages that we have reviewed and accepted through our

>   [scientific Python software peer review process](/about-peer-review/index.html)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  [scientific Python software peer review process](/about-peer-review/index.html),
```

> * Colleagues who I have met at other meetings such as PyCon,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Colleagues who I have met at other meetings, such as [PyCon](https://pycon.org/),
```

* Reviewers and editors from our community,
* Members of our advisory council, contributors, and
* Friends—so many friends.

> This year, I was busy as SciPy:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This year, I was busy at SciPy, and spent my days:
```

> 1. Running an in-person tutorial: Create Your First Python Package.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Running an in-person tutorial: [Create Your First Python Package](https://cfp.scipy.org/2024/talk/QT9GBY/).
```

> 2. Giving a talk in the Maintainers Track (what an honor!).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Giving a talk, [The power of community in solving scientific Python’s most challenging problems](https://cfp.scipy.org/2024/talk/AMTLJ7/), in the Maintainers Track (what an honor!).
```

3. Working the hallway track.
4. Running a 1.5-day sprint that resulted in over 35 issues and pull requests.
   Wow.

Admittedly, I started off this conference behind and frazzled. You see, pyOpenSci
has been growing in recent months. With that growth comes more wonderful people

> to support and engage with. More people getting involved does mean more work for

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to support and engage with, which is wonderful! But more people getting involved does mean more work for
```

pyOpenSci. However, the time is worth it, as all of this effort is moving
pyOpenSci's mission of supporting open science forward.

<figure>
  <img src="{{ site.baseurl }}/images/blog/2024/july/scipy-24-pyopensci-package-submission-growth.png" alt="A bar plot with purple bars titled - number of submissions by quarter per year. The plot shows the number of submissions that pyOS has received since it started peer review in 2019. We started with only a few submissions per quarter but the numbers have grown to about 13 per quarter on average in the 2024. " style="width: 100%;" />
  <figcaption><i class="fa-solid fa-heart-pulse"></i> pyOpenSci runs an open software peer review process. Above you can see how submissions have increased since we started in 2019. I started full time on pyOpenSci in late 2022. <i class="fa-solid fa-heart-pulse"></i>.</figcaption>
</figure>

In the end, even though I wasn't quite as prepared as I wanted to be, my talk
and the workshop went great! This was a lesson for me in understanding that
things can be less than perfect and still go well.

More on all of that below. But first--what is the SciPy Conference?

> ## About the SciPy Conference

Reviewer: I think this could be more powerful as a statement, something like "The SciPy Conference is [your big takeaway]"

If you haven't attended this meeting before, let me give you the rundown. The
SciPy Conference is an annual event dedicated to celebrating and learning more

> about scientific computing using the Python programming language. The meeting

Reviewer: ```suggestion
about scientific computing, all using the Python programming language. The meeting
```

started back in [~2002](https://web.archive.org/web/20021030003450/http://www.scipy.org/site_content/scipy02/). The early meetings were run by EnThought and
were smaller in size and scope. Over the years, SciPy has evolved significantly,
mirroring the [🚀 explosive growth of the Python ecosystem 🚀](https://stackoverflow.blog/2023/01/26/comparing-tag-trends-with-our-most-loved-programming-languages/)
in scientific computing and data science.

> Today, the SciPy Conference, hosted by [NumFocus](https://numfocus.org/),

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Today the SciPy Conference, hosted by [NumFocus](https://numfocus.org/),
```

attracts over 700 attendees from diverse scientific fields such as astronomy,

> biology, geophysics, and more. SciPy is much more than just a workshop.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
biology, geophysics, and more. SciPy is much more than just a meeting.
```

workshop seems out of place, as so far in this section SciPy has been primarily referred to as a meeting.

SciPy features:

* Incredible keynote speakers, such as the inspirational
  [Carol Willing](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=s-W-UvGgDco).
* Talks from the community about tools and approaches.
* Poster sessions that allow presenters to directly engage and discuss cool
  work with the meeting attendees.

> * Tutorials led by community members (and pyOpenSci) that cover important

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Tutorials led by community members (including pyOpenSci) that cover important
```

  scientific data processing and analysis-related Python skills.
* Sprints: collaborative coding sessions where people come to contribute to
  and learn about open-source projects.

I'd be remiss if I didn't mention the lightning talk sessions. During lightning
talks, people throw their names into a literal bucket. If their name is selected,

> they are given 5 minutes (or less if the dice are rolled) to talk about a topic

Reviewer: ```suggestion
they are given 5 minutes (or less if the dice are rolled) to talk about a topic
```

"(or less if the dice are rolled)" what does this mean?

> they love. At SciPy, there are often off-beat distractions from the moderators

Reviewer: ```suggestion
they love. At SciPy, there are often off-beat distractions from the moderators
```
is there a better description than distraction? this current sentence feels like people are giving lightning talks, and then the moderators interrupt//distract the audience with something completely off-topic. if that's what's happening, then it would be great to get some gentler language to help the reader prepare for this, and to make it seem fun and accessible.

  <figcaption><i class="fa-solid fa-heart-pulse"></i> It's well-known that lightning talk organizers enjoy heckling presenters. Sometimes they do so using props, such as the lobster claw seen here <i class="fa-solid fa-heart-pulse"></i>. Photo Credit: SciPyConf Fosstodon </figcaption>
</figure>

[Did someone mention sharks? More here on my experience last year giving a SciPy lighting talk.](scipy-2023-community.html)

The entire meeting is community-driven. The scientific Python community really
shows up to make this meeting what it is. All of the sessions are volunteer
organized and run. Volunteers also spend considerable time engaging with
presenters, ensuring there are social activities that everyone is invited to in
the evenings, and generally making sure that everyone feels included.

Since the pandemic, the SciPy meeting has adapted to support virtual/hybrid
participation, which has further increased its reach. In fact, some remote
attendees also helped organize the meeting!

> If you are a Pythonista who loves science, this meeting might be for you!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you are a Pythonista who loves science, this meeting is for you!
```

given that your post has been very complimentary of the event, I think it's OK to make a clear, declarative statement about attending.

> ## Create your first Python package tutorial @ SciPy 2024

Reviewer: I'd recommend rewording this to incorporate "pyOpenSci" into the header as well

My adventure at the SciPy meeting kicked off with a 4-hour tutorial entitled:

> _Create Your First Python Package: From Code to Module_. This tutorial was an

Reviewer: ```suggestion
_[Create Your First Python Package: From Code to Module](https://cfp.scipy.org/2024/talk/QT9GBY/)_. This tutorial was an
```
I noticed that you've applied formatting to the workshop title here, but not consistently throughout the post.

expanded version of the [Create Your First Python Package tutorial that
pyOpenSci ran in April 2024](pyos-education-announcement.html). In our first
workshop, we had over 20 people create their first Python package. We had
similar success in our SciPy tutorial.

I realized when I got to SciPy that I hadn't actually taught in person since
2020! I vividly remember the last in-person class that I led for the [Professional
Graduate Program in Earth Data Analytics that I created at CU
Boulder](https://catalog.colorado.edu/graduate/colleges-schools/interdisciplinary-programs/earth-data-analytics-foundations-graduate-certificate/).
That class happened on the Wednesday before the pandemic lockdown started in the
United States. It was a sad day to say "goodbye for now" to in-person teaching
and to my students. Teaching and working with learners is, after all, one of my
favorite things. However, luckily we had been running the program using a

> hybrid - online and in person approach so the transition was sad but didn't

Reviewer: ```suggestion
hybrid online and in-person approach, so the transition was sad, but didn't
```

The SciPy tutorial organizers did an amazing job of ensuring everything ran
smoothly.

After a really tricky internet situation at PyCon this past May, I truly
appreciated the smooth setup of the room.

A special shout-out to pyOpenSci community members
[Jeremiah](https://www.github.com/ucodery) and
[Isabel Zimmerman](https://github.com/isabelizimm), who were committed to
helping all the learners have a successful experience. Their support and
expertise were invaluable.

<figure>
  <img src="{{ site.baseurl }}/images/blog/2024/july/pyos-tutorial-scipy-24.jpeg" alt="A photograph showing a large open and well-lit meeting room with two rows of horizontal tables. People are working at laptops in the room. An instructor is at the front with their laptop screen projected on the screen" style="width: 90%;" />
  <figcaption><i class="fa-solid fa-heart-pulse"></i> This image was taken about halfway into the workshop. We had lost a few folks to other conference activities, but most were still engaged! <i class="fa-solid fa-heart-pulse"></i> Source: SciPyConf Fosstodon.</figcaption>
</figure>

### Navigating the Python packaging challenges together

> Of course, there were a few challenges too.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Of course, there were a few challenges, too.
```

</figure>

One of the decisions we made as a community early on was to use Hatch as an
end-to-end packaging tool. We believe Hatch is user-friendly and supports many
of the use cases scientists have when sharing their code.

<figure>
    <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}/images/blog/2024/july/pyopensci-packaging-hatch.png"><img src="{{ site.baseurl }}/images/blog/2024/july/pyopensci-packaging-hatch.png" alt="Image titled 'Creating an Opinionated Tutorial.' Below it lists four bullet points about Hatch: 1. Responsive maintainer, 2. User friendly, 3. Adheres to standards, 4. Doesn't lock you in." style="width: 80%;"></a>
    <figcaption>pyOpenSci is teaching with Hatch now because we have had good success with using Hatch and engaging with its forward-thinking maintainer.</figcaption>
</figure>

I met some great people and had good discussions about peer review and Python
packaging. The presentation will be on YouTube at some point, and I will update
this post with the link when it's live. In the meantime, my slides are available

> on [Zenodo pyOpenSci community](https://zenodo.org/records/8045448).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
on [pyOpenSci's Zenodo community](https://zenodo.org/records/8045448).
```

## The hallway track

It seems like this year has been the year of the hallway track. The hallway
track refers to the time spent in the hallways of a meeting, talking to people
you don't normally get to work with in person. Sometimes, the hallway track can
be even more valuable than attending the talks. You can always watch the talks
later on YouTube, but you can't always collaborate in real life like you can at
a meeting like SciPy, which attracts people from around the world.

I spent a lot of time talking with colleagues, friends, and community members
about all things Python, open source, and open science.

> * I worked with Sarah Kaiser on our new GitHub container to support workshops.

Reviewer: is there something we could link to for the GitHub container?

Author: oh yes - it's not merged yet but i could link to the PR! i'll do that locally.

> * I had an ad hoc sprint with Angus and Rowan from the MyST Markdown community

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* I had an _ad hoc_ sprint with [Angus](https://github.com/agoose77) and [Rowan](https://github.com/rowanc1) from the [MyST Markdown](https://mystmd.org/) community
```

  to develop our [pyOpenSci peer review metrics dashboard](https://www.pyopensci.org/peer-review-metrics).

Additionally, I caught up with colleagues, chatting about packaging and scientific Python.

> ## Sprints

Reviewer: going to stop noting it, but overall I think headings could be stronger with a descriptive and declarative statement, which will also help with SEO.

    alt="Another image similar to the above, but from the other side of the table
    on the second day."></a>
    <figcaption>People sitting at the pyOpenSci sprint table. We had a slightly
    different group each day, but the energy was equally enthusiastic both days.
    </figcaption>
</figure>

Several people made their first-ever contributions to open source during our
pyOpenSci sprints, which was fantastic. We had a lot of great people get
involved and support us! The energy was great.

## Wrapping up

It's amazing to think about how far pyOpenSci has come in the past five years.
In 2019, pyOpenSci was just kicking off its peer review process, and only a
small number of people knew about us. By 2023, we had some funding to begin
traveling and spreading the word about our work, but we were still somewhat
unknown in the community. Fast forward to 2024, and people not only know about
us but are also excited to contribute and support our mission. We aim to help
scientists find and build better software and develop better open science skills.

After this spectacular year, I can't wait to see what 2025 brings!

### Get involved

> If you are interested in getting involved with us, there are many ways to do so! Check out our [volunteer](/volunteer.html) page as a starting place. Or shoot an email to media at pyopensci.org.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you are interested in getting involved with us, there are many ways to do so! Check out our [volunteer](/volunteer.html) page as a starting place. Or shoot an email to [media at pyopensci.org](mailto:media@pyopensci.org).
```

> And maybe I'll see you next year at PyCon US or SciPy 2025!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
I can't wait to see you next year at PyCon US and SciPy 2025!
```
